---
layout: post 
title: Reflections on my Last Conference and Academic Journey
date: 2024-08-17 00:00:00 +0000
---

With the conclusion of #ACL2024 some reflections on the last conference of my PhD and the academic journey over the past
four years.

## ü§ù Conference

The food at the conference was absolutely amazing! On the academic side, things got spicy beyond just the cuisine. There
was a heated exchange after the second keynote on the reasoning and planning abilities of LLMs which added some
unexpected drama to the mix.

Attending conferences during my PhD was a highlight, especially since, as the only NLP researcher at the University of
Bern, it was fantastic to connect with so many like-minded people.

I am honored that the acting ACL president, Emily Bender, attended my oral presentation and actively engaged in the
discussion. Her concerns about synthetic data use in the legal domain, though not directly applicable to our work, added
an interesting dimension to the conversation. The exchange, while intense, was valuable to clarify our methods and
contribute to robust academic discourse.

Afterward, I had a great chat with Luca Soldaini about their paper OLMo. It‚Äôs fantastic to see this huge open science
effort rewarded with a best paper award!

## üßë‚Äç‚öñÔ∏è Reviews

Throughout my academic journey, peer review has been challenging and frustrating. Common issues included reviewers
focusing solely on self-disclosed limitations, undervaluing dataset contributions, and requesting impractical
experiments outside the research scope.

It was particularly disheartening to receive inconsistent review scores and rejection decisions that completely
disregarded our thorough rebuttals and additional experiments.

I believe many have had similar experiences, which is why the positive feedback from reviewers on my last paper was so
refreshing. One reviewer‚Äôs comment, "This is how a dataset paper should be written," made my day. The stellar
meta-review score and the consideration for the best paper award were the cherry on top. This experience was a
much-needed reminder of the rewarding aspects of academia, despite the often arduous process.

## üßë‚Äçüî¨ PhD Journey

When students ask if pursuing a PhD is worth it, I reflect on my own experience. The journey was challenging, filled
with long hours, late nights, and weekends working. Maintaining good mental health was tough, and the review process was
incredibly frustrating.

However, the rewards were significant. Earning a PhD opened many doors for me, granting access to opportunities that I
might not have had otherwise. It allows me to work on topics that I find genuinely fascinating, travel to conferences,
and enjoy the freedom to choose when and where I work. While the path is demanding, the benefits can be substantial,
particularly if you are passionate about your field.

## ‚öñÔ∏è Legal NLP

It was really nice talking to many researchers at the poster session. I think this may be a reflection of the surge in
interest in applications to the legal domain over the last years.

It is a very exciting time for legal NLP now, exemplified by so many legal AI startups being founded. When I started, we
were still very limited by the methods available to us. For example, generative capabilities were very limited with
models often still making grammar mistakes. Additionally, the context width was often limited to 512 tokens, making many
applications in the legal domain, such as document drafting and summarization, infeasible. Finally, while models are
still much worse multilingually compared to English, the situation is improving a lot. I am looking forward to seeing
researchers tackle more and more difficult and real world legal tasks.

Now I am very much looking forward to my next chapter in industry, more about this another time.

Thanks to all my amazing mentors and collaborators along the way, especially Veton Matoshi, Ilias Chalkidis, Matthias
St√ºrmer, Daniel E. Ho, and Garrett Honke.